>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 19...
ORLANDO IN MOURNING: ONE WEEK
AFTER THE LARGEST MASS SHOOTING
IN U.S. HISTORY.
TO STAY OR TO GO-- A VIEW FROM
BOTH SIDES OF THE "BREXIT"
BATTLE.
>> I PASSIONATELY WANT TO STAY.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO OUR
BUSINESS.
>> WE ARE WORTH MORE THAN A
STAR ON SOMEONE ELSE'S MAP.
>> Sreenivasan: AND A LOOK BACK
AT THE FIRST OUTSIDER CANDIDATE
TO WIN A MAJOR PARTY
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION,
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TODAY IN ORLANDO, AT CHURCHES
AND IN MEMORIAL SERVICES, A CITY
MARKED ONE WEEK SINCE A SELF-
RADICALIZED ISIS SYMPATHIZER
NAMED OMAR MATEEN SHOT AND
KILLED 49 PEOPLE WITH A SEMI-
AUTOMATIC RIFLE AT A GAY
NIGHTCLUB.
TOMORROW IN WASHINGTON, THE U.S.
SENATE IS SCHEDULED TO VOTE ON
GUN CONTROL MEASURES INTENDED TO
LESSEN THE ODDS OF SUCH A
MASSACRE HAPPENING AGAIN.
DEMOCRATS PROPOSE TO EXPAND
BACKGROUND CHECKS TO COVER
PURCHASES AT GUN SHOWS AND BAN
GUN SALES TO ANYONE ON A
GOVERNMENT TERRORIST WATCH LIST.
REPUBLICANS PROPOSE THE F.B.I.
BE ALERTED WHEN SOMEONE ON A
WATCH LIST BUYS A GUN FROM A
LICENSED FIREARM DEALER, AND
LETTING THE GOVERNMENT DELAY A
GUN SALE TO SOMEONE ON A WATCH
LIST FOR THREE DAYS WHILE
SEEKING A COURT ORDER TO STOP
IT.
TODAY, THE NATIONAL RIFLE
ASSOCIATION SAID IT SUPPORTS
ONLY THE REPUBLICAN BILL WITH
THAT DUE PROCESS PROVISION.
>> THIS NOTION THAT MORE GUN
CONTROL IS GOING TO PREVENT SOME
JIHADIST WHO THINKS HE'S GOING
TO OBTAIN MARTYRDOM BY MURDERING
INNOCENT PEOPLE REALLY GETS AWAY
FROM THE SERIOUS NATURE OF THE
PROBLEM THAT WE'RE FACING.
>> Sreenivasan: ATTORNEY GENERAL
LORETTA LYNCH SAID TODAY THE
ABILITY TO BLOCK A GUN SALE IS
AN IMPORTANT TOOL, BUT THREE
DAYS MAY NOT BE ENOUGH TIME TO
PRODUCE THE EVIDENCE.
>> WHAT WE THINK IS MORE
APPROPRIATE IS THE ONE THAT
GIVES US THE MOST FLEXIBILITY--
THE ABILITY TO STOP THAT SALE AT
THE BEGINNING AND THE ABILITY,
AGAIN, IF IT'S CHALLENGED, TO
PROTECT SENSITIVE AND CLASSIFIED
INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY AT 2:00
A.M., THE TIME LAST WEEK'S
RAMPAGE AT THE PULSE NIGHTCLUB
BEGAN, AN L.G.B.T. CLUB DOWN THE
STREET HELD A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOR THE VICTIMS.
18 OF 53 PEOPLE WHO SURVIVED
GUNSHOT WOUNDS REMAIN
HOSPITALIZED.
>> JOINING MY NOW FROM ORLANDO
FOR MORE OF THE INVESTIGATION
AND MOOD OF THE CITY IS PAUL
BRINKMAN.
PUTTING TOGETHER A TIME LINE OF
EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED IN THE
LAST THREE HOURS, ACCORDING TO
ALL THE WITNESSES, SURVIVORS
THIS THERE, ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
THAT PEOPLE OFTEN HAVE IS WHAT
TOOK THE POLICE SO LONG, WHY DID
IT TAKE THEM THREE HOURS?
WHAT YOU DID POINT OUT IS THEY
WERE THERE RELATIVELY QUICKLY.
>> THERE WAS AN ORLANDO POLICE
OFFICER THERE ON THE SCENE AS AN
OFF-DUTY SECURITY GUARD.
HE EXCHANGED GUN FIRE PRETTY
QUICKLY WITH THE SHOOTER, HE
REALIZED HE WAS OUTGUNNED AND
HAD TO RETREAT AND CALL FOR
BACKUP.
TWO OTHER OFFICERS EXPERIENCE
PRETTY MUCH THE SAME THING AND
THE SHOOTER RETREATED IN THE
BACK OF THE BAR.
WE WERE WORKING ON THAT FOR A
PERIOD OF DAYS BEFORE WE POSTED
THAT.
BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY, YOU KNOW, IT
TOOK A LITTLE WHILE TO PIECE IT
ALL TOGETHER.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS ALSO
NOW A WEEKEND WHERE WE SEE THE
BEGINNING OR THE CONTINUATION OF
FUNERALS OF THE VICTIMS.
>> YES.
YOU KNOW RIGHT AWAY, ONE OF OUR
FIRST TASKS IN THE NEWSROOM WAS
TO COVER EVERY VICTIM, FIND OUT
WHO THEY WERE, AND THEN WE HAVE
KEPT UP WITH THAT DATABASE, WITH
WHEN VIGILS ARE HELD FOR THEM,
WHEN THEIR FUNERALS ARE LAPPING
NOW, SEVERAL EVERY DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PAUL, SADLY
THIS IS NOT THE FIRST SOMETIME
THIS HAS OCCURRED AND THERE IS
NOW A INFRASTRUCTURE OF PEOPLE
WHO HAVE SURVIVED FROM OTHER
MASS SHOOTINGS.
WHO ARE THOSE PEOPLE AND WHAT
ARE THEY PLANNING ON TO HELP
ORLANDO?
>> IT'S NOT A FORMAL GROUP.
THEY DON'T EVEN HAVE A FORMAL
NAME.
BUT IT IS A NETWORK OF FAMILY
MEMBERS OF VICTIMS OF OTHER MASS
SHOOTINGS.
BUT THEY TRY TO STAY IN TOUCH
WITH EACH OTHER AND PROVIDE
WHATEVER SUPPORT THEY CAN, THEY
ARE SCHEDULED TO FLY HERE
ACTUALLY TONIGHT, SOME OF THEM
WILL BE ARRIVING AND THEN THEY
WILL BE HERE FOR TWO DAYS AND
LOOKING FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO
CONNECT WITH VICTIMS AND THEIR
FAMILIES AND THEY ARE GOING TO
BE WORKING WITH EQUALITY FLORIDA
AND SOME OF THE OTHER LGBT
ORGANIZATIONS HERE.
ONE OF THEIR CAUSES THAT THEY'RE
MOST PASSIONATE ABOUT IS THE
FUNDRAISING.
BECAUSE MANY OF THEM HAVE
ACTUALLY SEEN MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS RAISED IN SOME OF THESE
OTHER SHOOTINGS, WHERE VICTIMS
AND THEIR FAMILIES WHO WERE
AFFECTED BY THEM ARE STILL
STRUGGLING TO PAY THEIR BILLS
AND HAVEN'T GOTTEN ANY MONEY.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THEY CAN
SAY YOU KNOW WATCH OUT FOR
FRACTURED FUNDRAISING, WATCH OUT
FOR GROUPS THAT ARE TRYING TO
RAISE MONEY FOR OTHER GROUPS.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE NEED FOR
VICTIMS AND THEIR FAMILIES IS
URGENT.
AND IN MANY CASES THERE ARE
PEOPLE WHO THEY'RE NOT ABLE TO
PAY THEIR RENT OR NOT ABLE TO GO
TO WORK.
AND THEY NEED HELP.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
PAUL BRINKMAN OF THE ORLANDO
SENTINEL.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE WAKE OF
THE ORLANDO MASSACRE,
PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE DONALD
TRUMP CALLED TODAY FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT TO CONDUCT
SURVEILLANCE OF MOSQUES AND TO
CONSIDER PROFILING AMERICAN
MUSLIMS.
HE MADE THE SUGGESTIONS IN A
TELEPHONE INTERVIEW WITH CBS
NEWS.
>> WELL, I THINK PROFILING IS
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO START THINKING ABOUT AS
A COUNTRY.
OTHER COUNTRIES DO IT, YOU LOOK
AT ISRAEL AND YOU LOOK AT
OTHERS, THEY DO IT AND THEY DO
IT SUCCESSFULLY.
AND I HATE THE CONCEPT OF
PROFILING BUT WE HAVE TO START
USING COMMON SENSE AND WE HAVE
TO USE OUR HEADS.
>> Sreenivasan: DRY CONDITIONS
AND HIGH TEMPERATURES CONTINUE
TO AGGRAVATE WILDFIRES FIRES IN
FOUR WESTERN STATES.
IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA,
FIREFIGHTERS BRAVING
TEMPERATURES IN THE HIGH 90s
HAVE CONTAINED 45 PERCENT OF A
FOUR-DAY-OLD WILDFIRE THAT HAS
SPREAD OVER 12 SQUARE MILES.
MORE THAN A THOUSAND
FIREFIGHTERS HAVE WORKED ON THE
FIRE SINCE WEDNESDAY, WHICH HAS
COME WITHIN TWO MILES OF COASTAL
COMMUNITIES.
IN NEW MEXICO, A WILDFIRE THAT
BEGAN TUESDAY IN THE MOUNTAINS
SOUTHEAST OF ALBUQUERQUE HAS
BURNED 27 SQUARE MILES AND
DESTROYED TWO DOZEN HOMES.
THAT FIRE IS ONLY ABOUT TEN
PERCENT CONTAINED.
WILDFIRES ARE ALSO BURNING IN
ARIZONA AND UTAH.
LEARN HOW ONE SURVIVOR OF THE
ORLANDO SHOOTING IS RECOVERING
AFTER BEING HELD HOSTAGE AT
PULSE NIGHTCLUB.
READ THE STORY ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
ON THURSDAY, BRITISH VOTERS
DECIDE WHETHER TO REMAIN PART OF
THE EUROPEAN UNION, AN ECONOMIC
AND POLITICAL BLOC ENCOMPASSING
28 NATIONS AND 500 MILLION
PEOPLE.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF A SO-CALLED
"BREXIT"-- OR BRITISH EXIT FROM
THE E.U.-- ON THE NATION'S
ECONOMY AND SOVEREIGNTY DEEPLY
DIVIDE BRITISH VOTERS, WITH
POLLS SHOWING A SLIGHT EDGE FOR
THE LEAVE MOVEMENT.
FOR TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
PATRICIA SABGA WENT TO THE U.K.
TO EXPLORE BOTH SIDES OF THE
DEBATE.
>> Reporter: AT THE CAP 'N' GOWN
PUB IN WORCESTERSHIRE, ENGLAND,
PINTS GO HAND IN HAND WITH
POLITICS.
ON TAP TONIGHT, THE UPCOMING
REFERENDUM WHEN BRITISH VOTERS
WILL DECIDE WHETHER TO STAY IN
OR LEAVE THE EUROPEAN UNION.
WHICH WAY ARE YOU THINKING OF
VOTING?
>> I'M NOT SURE YET.
I'M WAITING TO BE EDUCATED.
>> I'M THINKING IN, BUT I STILL
NEED TO GET MORE EDUCATION ON
IT.
>> Reporter: FAMOUS FOR THE LEA
AND PERRINS SAUCE THAT BEARS ITS
NAME, THE COUNTY OF
WORCESTERSHIRE, 136 MILES WEST
OF LONDON, HAS BEEN AT THE
EPICENTER OF DEFINING MOMENTS IN
BRITISH HISTORY, LIKE THE 1651
BATTLE OF WORCESTER THAT ENDED
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WAR.
STILL LARGELY RURAL, ITS
CATHEDRAL AND CRICKET CLUBS ARE
QUINTESSENTIALLY BRITISH.
WITH 92 PERCENT OF ITS ROUGHLY
600,000 RESIDENTS WHITE, IT IS
MORE ETHNICALLY HOMOGENOUS THAN
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
IN THE BATTLE OVER BRITAIN'S
FUTURE TIES TO THE EUROPEAN
UNION, THE COUNTY OF
WORCESTERSHIRE IS A BELLWETHER.
AND RIGHT NOW VOTERS HERE ARE
PRETTY EVENLY DIVIDED BETWEEN
THOSE WHO WANT TO STAY IN THE
E.U. AND THOSE WHO FEEL BRITAIN
WOULD BE BETTER OFF GOING IT
ALONE.
TO WOO THE UNDECIDED, BOTH SIDES
HAVE UNLEASHED A MEDIA BLITZ.
>> IF WE LEFT, INDEPENDENT
EXPERTS ESTIMATE 950,000 JOBS
WOULD BE LOST.
>> THE EURO IS BROKE, AND THE
E.U. PLANS TO LET IN ANOTHER
FIVE COUNTRIES.
>> Reporter: SO CAP ' ¡N' GOWN
OWNER TED MARSHALL IS TRYING TO
CUT THROUGH THE NOISE.
HE'S ORGANIZED SEVEN DEBATES IN
THE RUN-UP TO THE REFERENDUM.
>> I WOULD ASK THE PEOPLE DON'T
HECKLE TOO MUCH.
>> Reporter: THIS GATHERING
TACKLED PERHAPS THE MOST
DIVISIVE ISSUE: THE "FREEDOM OF
MOVEMENT" RULE THAT ALLOWS
CITIZENS OF THE E.U.'S 27 OTHER
MEMBER STATES TO MOVE TO
BRITAIN, WORK HERE, AND RECEIVE
GENEROUS GOVERNMENT BENEFITS,
INCLUDING FREE HEALTH CARE FOR
THEMSELVES AND THEIR FAMILIES.
>> DONALD TRUMP HAS TALKED A LOT
ABOUT MIGRATION-- YOU CALL IT
IMMIGRATION-- AND THAT'S THE
BIGGEST ISSUE HERE FOR THIS E.U.
REFERENDUM, NO QUESTION AT ALL.
>> THIS HOUSE BELIEVES...
>> Reporter: SINCE 2004, WHEN
THE E.U. EXPANDED TO INCLUDE
COUNTRIES FROM EASTERN EUROPE,
THE NUMBER OF NON-BRITISH, E.U.-
BORN CITIZENS WORKING IN THE
U.K. HAS QUADRUPLED FROM AROUND
HALF A MILLION TO NEARLY TWO
MILLION.
AN INFLUX THAT'S PUSHED 21-YEAR-
OLD WORCESTERSHIRE NATIVE ELLIS
TUSTIN TO THE LEAVE CAMP.
>> INTERESTED IN LEAVING THE
UNION?
>> Reporter: THE FIRST PERSON IN
HIS FAMILY TO GO TO UNIVERSITY,
TUSTIN SAYS E.U. MEMBERSHIP HAS
FUELED IMMIGRATION THAT'S HARMED
WORKING CLASS COMMUNITIES LIKE
HIS.
>> THE ENTIRE CULTURE OF THE
TOWN IS TOTALLY SHIFTED, INTO
YOU KNOW, IT'S ALMOST FOR MANY
PEOPLE IN THIS TOWN THEY FEEL
IT'S AN EASTERN EUROPEAN TOWN
NOW.
>> Reporter: THAT'S ONE REASON
WHY TUSTIN JOINED THE EURO-
SKEPTIC UKIP-- THE UK
INDEPENDENCE PARTY.
DESCRIBED BY CRITICS AS FAR
RIGHT, TUSTIN SAYS THE PARTY HAS
BEEN DERIDED FOR A PLATFORM MANY
BRITS ARE TOO AFRAID TO VOICE.
>> PEOPLE ARE AFRAID OF SAYING
I'M TIRED OF, YOU KNOW, DOCTOR'S
APPOINTMENTS BECOMING LONGER,
I'M WORRIED ABOUT MY CHILDREN
NOT GETTING THAT PLACE IN
SCHOOL.
BECAUSE AS SOON AS SOMEONE SAYS
SOMETHING LIKE THIS IN THIS
COUNTRY, THEY ARE IMMEDIATELY
CAST AS RACIST OR XENOPHOBIC.
>> Reporter: TUSTIN IS NOT
AFRAID TO ARGUE E.U. MEMBERSHIP
HAS HURT BRITISH WORKERS,
BECAUSE, HE SAYS, IMMIGRANTS
WILLING TO WORK FOR LESS POACH
JOBS.
>> A LOT OF THE WORK THAT PEOPLE
ARE DOING IS LOW PAID JOBS, AND
THOSE ARE THE JOBS WHERE THE
VALUE IS BEING UNDERCUT.
THOSE ARE THE JOBS WHERE PEOPLE
WILL SAY TO THE EMPLOYERS, "I
WILL HAPPILY WORK FOR FIVE
POUNDS LESS THAN HIM AND STILL
DO THE SAME JOB."
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE DEBATE IS 23-YEAR-OLD
WORCESTERSHIRE-BORN RICHARD
FULLOWAY, A MEMBER OF THE YOUTH
WING OF BRITAIN'S CONSERVATIVE
PARTY, FULLOWAY IS APPLYING TO
BECOME A ROYAL NAVAL OFFICER, A
CAREER GOAL THAT INFORMS HIS
VIEWS.
>> WHAT I'M LOOKING AT IS THE
SORT OF BIGGER PICTURE AROUND
BRITAIN'S INFLUENCE IN THE WORLD
WHERE BRITAIN STANDS IN THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: FOR FULLOWAY, THAT
MEANS NOT SWIMMING AWAY FROM
EUROPE.
>> THE WORLD IS JOINING INTO
POWER BLOCKS, SO YOU'VE GOT
CHINA, YOU'VE GOT RUSSIA PUSHING
ITS WEIGHT AROUND OVER IN THE
UKRAINE, YOU'VE GOT CHINA IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA.
YOU'VE GOT JAPAN LOOKING TO
REARM.
YOU'VE GOT THE U.S. TRYING TO
FIND ITS PLACE IN THE WORLD.
I THINK AS A COUNTRY WE ARE MUCH
BETTER OFF AS A GROUP OF 500
MILLION PEOPLE THAN WE ARE ON
OUR OWN AS 67 MILLION PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: IT'S A GROUP THAT'S
GIVEN BRITAIN ACCESS TO THE
WORLD'S LARGEST TRADE BARRIER-
FREE SINGLE MARKET WITHOUT
HAVING TO ADOPT EUROPE'S
TROUBLED SINGLE CURRENCY, THE
EURO, OR BAILOUT STRUGGLING
EURO-ECONOMIES LIKE GREECE.
>> WE ARE IN SUCH A SPECIAL
POSITION.
MOST OF THE LEAVE ARGUMENTS ARE
BASED ON THIS IS WHAT WE'D HOPE
WILL HAPPEN.
THE REMAIN ARGUMENT IS WE ARE
BETTER OFF.
>> Reporter: A CHORUS OF VOICES
IS WARNING THAT LEAVING THE E.U.
WOULD HARM BRITAIN'S ECONOMY,
AND THAT NEGOTIATING A NEW TRADE
DEAL WITH EUROPE COULD BE
DIFFICULT.
BUT SOME SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS
HAVE FOUND LIFE UNDER THE E.U.
TOO DIFFICULT.
>> I HEARD IT DESCRIBED RECENTLY
AS A STITCH-UP BETWEEN BIG
GLOBAL CORPORATIONS AND THE BIG
BANKS.
>> Reporter: MIKE HUMM OWNS THE
HOLYWELL WATER COMPANY, WHICH
BOTTLES AND SELLS WATER FROM THE
HOLYWELL SPRING NESTLED IN
WORCESTERSHIRE'S MALVERN HILLS.
HOW LONG HAS THIS SPRING BEEN
GOING?
>> OH, I DON'T KNOW.
IT FIRST CAME INTO HISTORY IN
1558.
>> Reporter: BUT ACCORDING TO
E.U. RULES, HUMM COULDN'T LABEL
HIS WATER "SPRING" WATER,
BECAUSE HE PASSES IT THROUGH
ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT TO KILL OFF
POTENTIAL VIRUSES OR BACTERIA.
>> IT GOES THROUGH THE U.V.
FILTER, WHICH IS THAT STAINLESS
STEEL TUBE WITH THE RED END.
>> Reporter: THAT'S THE ONE
THAT'S CAUSING ALL THE PROBLEMS
WITH THE E.U.?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE HUMM SELLS
HIS PRODUCT ONLY IN BRITAIN, THE
U.K. GOVERNMENT ALLOWS HIM TO
CALL IT "SPRING WATER."
STILL, HE SPENT MONTHS FIGHTING
AN E.U. REGULATION, HE SAYS, WAS
BASED ON GUIDELINES DRAFTED BY
BIG CORPORATIONS.
>> DANONE, COCA COLA, NESTLE.
WHAT THEY'RE DOING IS PROTECTING
THEIR MARKET, AND THE INFERENCE
IS THAT MALVERN WATER IS NOT AS
GOOD AS THEIRS.
THAT IT'S NOT A FINE WATER.
AND THAT'S RUBBISH.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME BRITISH
SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS HAVE
THRIVED IN THE E.U.
>> I PASSIONATELY WANT TO STAY.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO OUR
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: RICHARD BOORN OWNS
BONDTECH, WHICH MANUFACTURES
SPECIALTY ADHESIVES FOR BONDING
METAL AND HORSE HOOVES.
HOW DOES BEING A PART OF THE
E.U. FACILITATE YOUR BUSINESS?
>> IT ENABLES US TO BRING GOODS
IN WITHOUT TRADE BARRIERS.
>> Reporter: WHICH MEANS BOORN
DOESN'T PAY IMPORT TAXES ON THE
RAW MATERIALS HE SOURCES FROM
OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
BUT IF BRITAIN WERE TO LEAVE THE
EU...
>> WE WILL PAY MORE FOR OUR
GOODS, BECAUSE THERE WILL BE
IMPORTANT TARIFFS.
THIS BELIEF THAT WE CAN STAND
ALONE-- THAT BOAT SAILED MANY
YEARS AGO.
WE NEED TO BE PART OF THE
BIGGEST TRADING GROUP IN THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: MANY OF THE ISSUES
AT PLAY IN THE BRITISH
REFERENDUM WILL RESONATE WITH
AMERICAN VOTERS.
LIKE THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION
ON JOBS AND THE ECONOMY, OR
ISOLATIONISM VERSUS
INTERNATIONALISM.
AND LIKE THE U.S. PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION, THE POLITICS OF
IDENTITY ARE SHAPING VOTER
ATTITUDES ON THIS SIDE OF THE
POND.
>> MY GRANDFATHER HE HAS STORIES
GOING BACK 80, 70 YEARS ON THIS
STREET.
NOW HE DID NOT STAND AS A KID IN
THE CENTER OF THE STREET THERE,
LOOKING AT GERMAN BOMBERS GOING
OVER THE TOP OF US, FOR THEN 70
YEARS LATER TO HAVE HIS
SOVEREIGNTY DICTATED BY THE SAME
COUNTRY THAT THEN TRIED TO DO IT
THEN.
>> Reporter: FOR LEAVE
CAMPAIGNER ELLIS TUSTIN, THAT
IDENTITY INCLUDES A BRITAIN
WHICH EMERGED FROM THE ASHES OF
WORLD WAR II TO REMAIN A WORLD
POWER.
>> WE ARE THE FIFTH LARGEST
ECONOMY IN THE WORLD.
WE HAVE THE FOURTH LARGEST
MILITARY BUDGET.
WE HOLD A SEAT ON THE SECURITY
COUNCIL.
WE ARE A MEMBER FOUNDER OF THE
G-8.
WE ARE WORTH MORE THAN A STAR ON
SOMEBODY ELSE'S MAP.
>> Reporter: BUT STAY CAMPAIGNER
RICHARD FULLOWAY BELIEVES THE
NATION SHOULD TAKE PRIDE IN ITS
E.U. STANDING.
>> WHEN I SEE OUR PRIME MINISTER
SIT AT THE TABLE AS EQUAL WITH
EVERY OTHER EUROPEAN NATION, I
DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY YOU WOULD
NOT FEEL PROUD TO BE AT THAT
TABLE.
>> Reporter: AT THE CAP ' ¡N'
GOWN, THE STAY CAMP WON THIS
DEBATE BY A SHOW OF HANDS, BUT
THE ARGUMENTS RAGE ON.
>> WHY CAN'T WE SEE MY DOCTOR
THEN?
>> THIS COUNTRY...
>> LET'S MOVE ON, PLEASE!
>> Reporter: IF BRITAIN VOTES TO
LEAVE, IT WILL START A TWO YEAR
CLOCK TO OFFICIALLY EXIT THE
E.U.
AND IF IT VOTES TO STAY...
>> IF WE STAY, LET'S GET IN
THERE.
LET'S MAKE EUROPE GREAT AS WELL
AS GREAT BRITAIN.
IF WE LEAVE, WE'VE GOT A LOT OF
WORK TO DO, WE'VE GOT A LOT WORK
TO DO.
BUT WE ARE GREAT BRITAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: DONALD TRUMP HAS
NEVER HELD ELECTIVE OFFICE, BUT
IF THE NEW YORK BUSINESSMAN
SECURES HIS NOMINATION AT THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION
IN CLEVELAND NEXT MONTH, HE WILL
NOT BE THE FIRST OUTSIDER TO
LEAD A MAJOR PARTY.
IN THE CRITICALLY ACCLAIMED 2005
BOOK "FIVE DAYS IN
PHILADELPHIA," JOURNALIST AND
HISTORIAN CHARLES PETERS
EXAMINED HOW OUTSIDER WENDELL
WILLKIE BECAME THE REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE 76 YEARS AGO.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JEFF GREENFIELD EXPLAINS HOW
INSTRUCTIVE THAT HISTORY LESSON
IS TODAY.
>> Reporter: OUR PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINEES HAVE COME FROM MANY
PLACES.
THEY'VE BEEN GOVERNORS-- BOTH
ROOSEVELTS, CARTER, REAGAN, BILL
CLINTON, GEORGE W. BUSH, MITT
ROMNEY.
THEY'VE BEEN SENATORS-- WARREN
HARDING, JFK, BOB DOLE, KERRY,
MCCAIN, OBAMA.
AND THEY'VE BEEN GENERALS--
WASHINGTON, BOTH HARRISONS,
ANDREW JACKSON, ZACHARY TAYLOR,
GRANT, AND EISENHOWER.
>> THE 22ND CONVENTION OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY WILL NOW COME
TO ORDER!
>> Reporter: BUT UNTIL NOW, FOR
MORE THAN 200 YEARS, ONLY ONE
GENUINE OUTSIDER HAS EVER WON A
MAJOR PARTY PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION: REPUBLICAN WENDELL
WILLKIE, IN 1940.
>> I PLEDGE MYSELF TO YOU AND I
ASK EACH OF YOU TO JOIN WITH ME
IN THIS GREAT CRUSADE.
>> Reporter: WILLKIE'S SUCCESS
OFFERS SOME LESSONS FOR 2016.
WILLKIE WAS A CHILD OF HEARTLAND
AMERICA, BORN AND RAISED IN
SMALL TOWN INDIANA.
HIS BLEND OF INTELLIGENCE AND
DISCIPLINE BROUGHT HIM TO THE
PEAK OF BUSINESS SUCCESS AS
PRESIDENT OF A MAJOR PUBLIC
UTILITY HOLDING COMPANY, WHERE
HE GAINED FAME AS A SHARP CRITIC
OF F.D.R.'S NEW DEAL REGULATIONS
AND AS AN ADVOCATE FOR SOCIAL
REFORM.
THAT PROVED AN APPEALING PACKAGE
FOR WHAT WAS THEN A DOMINANT
WING OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY OF 1940 WAS
VERY DIFFERENT FROM TODAY'S
VERSION.
ITS POWER CENTER WAS HERE IN THE
EAST AND ESPECIALLY IN NEW YORK,
WHERE THE FINANCIAL AND MEDIA
TITANS EMBRACED MORE MODERATE
AND LIBERAL IDEAS THAN THEIR
MIDWESTERN CONSERVATIVE RIVALS.
THEY ALSO WERE MUCH MORE
INCLINED TO HELP EUROPEAN
NATIONS BESIEGED BY HITLER'S
GERMANY.
MORE AND MORE, THESE POWER
BROKERS SAW WILLKIE AS THEIR
IDEAL CANDIDATE.
"TIME" MAGAZINE, THE WIDELY-READ
NEW YORK-BASED NEWSWEEKLY, PUT
HIM ON THE COVER IN 1939.
"FORTUNE," "LIFE" AND OTHER MASS
MAGAZINES FOLLOWED.
AND WHILE THERE WAS NO TWITTER
OR INSTAGRAM FOR WILLKIE TO
POLISH HIS OWN IMAGE, HIS WITTY
APPEARANCE ON THE POPULAR RADIO
QUIZ SHOW "INFORMATION PLEASE"
DRAMATICALLY RAISED HIS PUBLIC
PROFILE.
>> MR. WILLKIE.
HE ENTERED WORLD WAR I AS A
PRIVATE AND HOW DID YOU COME
OUT, MR. WILLKIE?
>> I WAS A FIRST LIEUTENANT
THROUGHOUT THE WAR.
I WAS RECOMMENDED FOR A
PROMOTION AT THE END, WHEN THEY
KNEW I WAS THROUGH.
>> Reporter: AS THE 1940
CAMPAIGN APPROACHED, THREE
REPUBLICANS APPEARED TO BE THE
LEADING CHOICES FOR PRESIDENT--
THE SENIOR REPUBLICAN IN THE
U.S. SENATE, ARTHUR VANDENBERG,
OF MICHIGAN; SENATOR ROBERT
TAFT, OF OHIO, THE SYMBOL OF
MIDWEST CONSERVATISM AND SON OF
A FORMER PRESIDENT; AND THE 37-
YEAR-OLD ORGANIZED CRIME-BUSTING
DISTRICT ATTORNEY OF MANHATTAN,
TOM DEWEY.
ALL THREE ESPOUSED ISOLATIONISM
AND AVOIDING ANY U.S.
INVOLVEMENT IN BREWING EUROPEAN
CONFLICTS.
BUT THAT VIEW BECAME
INCREASINGLY HARD TO SUSTAIN BY
THE SPRING OF 1940, AS HITLER'S
ARMIES HAD CONQUERED DENMARK,
THE NETHERLANDS, BELGIUM,
NORWAY, AND FRANCE.
AS THE CONVENTION BEGAN, WILLKIE
WAS THE ONLY REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFUL EMBRACING
THE IDEA OF AMERICAN AID TO
EUROPE.
THE EASTERN MEDIA REDOUBLED ITS
SUPPORT FOR WILLKIE AS THE
CONVENTION BALLOTING DREW NEAR.
ITS SEMI-OFFICIAL VOICE, "THE
NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE," RAN A
FRONT PAGE EDITORIAL URGING HIS
NOMINATION, THE FIRST IN ITS
HISTORY.
THE GALLERIES, PACKED WITH
WILLKIE SUPPORTERS, FILLED
PHILADELPHIA'S CONVENTION HALL
WITH A CHANT THAT DOMINATED THE
PROCEEDINGS.
>> WE WANT WILLKIE!
>> Reporter: A UNITED OPPOSITION
MIGHT HAVE PREVAILED OVER
WILLKIE, BUT JUST AS IN THIS
YEAR'S REPUBLICAN RACE, THAT
OPPOSITION DID NOT UNITE.
ON THE SIXTH BALLOT, WILLKIE
WON.
>> OHIO MOVES THAT THE
NOMINATION OF WENDELL WILLKIE
BE MADE UNANIMOUS.
>> Reporter: WILLKIE COULDN'T
STOP F.D.R. FROM WINNING AN
UNPRECEDENTED THIRD TERM THAT
NOVEMBER.
MORE IMPORTANTLY, WILLKIE
SUPPORTED THE PRESIDENT ON TWO
CRITICAL POLICIES-- THE FIRST
PEACETIME MILITARY DRAFT IN U.S.
HISTORY AND LEASING WAR
EQUIPMENT TO BRITAIN.
A MORE PARTISAN REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE WOULD NEVER HAVE DONE
THAT.
AFTER THE ELECTION, WILLKIE
BECAME ONE OF ROOSEVELT'S
STRONGEST ALLIES IN MOBILIZING
THE COUNTRY FOR THE WAR THAT WAS
TO COME.
NOW, THREE QUARTERS OF A CENTURY
LATER, ANOTHER OUTSIDE APPEARS
TO HAVE CAPTURED THE REPUBLICAN
NOMINATION.
BUT UNLIKE WILLKIE, TRUMP'S
VICTORY CAME NOT FROM RIDING THE
FORCES OF THE REPUBLICAN
ESTABLISHMENT, BUT BY
VANQUISHING THEM.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAQ'S
GOVERNMENT SAYS THEIR SOLDIERS
HAVE RETAKEN MOST OF FALLUJAH,
THE CITY 40 MILES WEST OF
BAGHDAD OCCUPIED BY ISIS FOR THE
PAST TWO-AND-HALF YEARS.
AN IRAQI COMMANDER SAID TODAY
GOVERNMENT TROOPS CONTROL 80
PERCENT OF THE CITY, BUT ARE
HAMPERED BY ISIS BOMBS, BOOBY
TRAPS, AND SNIPERS.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS MORE
THAN 80,000 CIVILIANS HAVE
EVACUATED FALLUJAH, OVERWHELMING
CAMPS RUN BY THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT AND AID GROUPS.
THE LARGEST PROTEST IN 20 YEARS
AGAINST AMERICAN MILITARY
PRESENCE IN JAPAN HAPPENED IN
OKINAWA TODAY.
AN ESTIMATED 65,000 CAME
OUT TO PROTEST THE 50,000 U.S.
MILITARY PERSONNEL AND CIVILIAN
CONTRACTORS BASED THERE.
THE PROTESTERS ALSO OPPOSE A
PLAN TO BUILD A NEW MARINE
AIRFIELD IN THE LESS POPULATED
NORTHERN PART OF THE ISLAND.
THE DEMONSTRATIONS FOLLOW THE
ARREST LAST MONTH OF A FORMER
MARINE WORKING AS A CONTRACTOR
WHO IS SUSPECTED OF THE RECENT
RAPE AND MURDER OF A LOCAL
WOMAN.
THE JAPANESE BASE IS OF GROWING
STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE TO U.S.
DEFENSE OFFICIALS CONCERNED
ABOUT CHINA'S EXPANDING
INFLUENCE IN THE REGION.
AND, SINGER-SONGWRITER MELISSA
ETHERIDGE HAS A NEW SONG
HONORING THE VICTIMS OF LAST
WEEK'S MASS SHOOTING.
IT'S CALLED "PULSE"-- AFTER THE
NIGHTCLUB WHERE THE ATTACK
OCCURRED-- AND ETHERIDGE
PERFORMED IT THIS WEEK ON THE
PUBLIC TELEVISION PROGRAM
"INFINITY HALL LIVE."
>> ♪ I AM HUMAN, I AM LOVE
AND MY HEART BEATS WITH MY BLOOD
♪ LOVE WILL ALWAYS WIN
UNDERNEATH THE SKIN
♪ EVERYBODY'S GOT A PULSE
♪ WHO YOU GONNA HATE NOW
WHEN THERE'S NO ONE LEFT BUT YOU
♪ WHO YOU GONNA GUN DOWN
IF YOU CAN'T KILL THE TRUTH.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY ONLINE
TOMORROW AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR
WE'LL HEAR FROM LATINOS IN
ORLANDO ON HOW THEY'RE HANDLING
THE AFTERMATH OF THE GAY
NIGHTCLUB SHOOTING WHICH TOOK
SO MANY YOUNG LATINO LIVES.
>> IT'S URGENT THAT WE NOT
GIVE UP ON SOCIALIZING AND
BEING WITH EACH OTHER.
IT'S HEALTHY FOR YOU FOR YOUR
GRIEVING PROCESS TO BE AMONGST
PEOPLE WHO UNDERSTAND YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S ALL FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NewsHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.